Knowing and understanding the traffic conditions and phenomena over road networks has become increasingly important to the goal of achieving smooth-flowing, congestion-free traffic, especially in densely-populated urban cities. According to a 2011 urban mobility report (Schrank et al., 2011), traffic congestion in the USA has caused 1.9 billion gallons of extra fuel, 4.8 billion hours of travel delay, and $101 billion of delay and fuel cost. Such huge resource wastage can potentially be mitigated if the spatiotemporally varying traffic phenomena (e.g., speeds and travel times along road segments) are predicted accurately enough in real time to detect and forecast the congestion hotspots; network-level (e.g., ramp metering, road pricing) and user-level (e.g., route replanning) measures can then be taken to relieve this congestion, so as to improve the overall efficiency of road networks.
In practice, it is non-trivial to achieve real-time, accurate prediction of a spatiotemporally varying traffic phenomenon because the quantity of sensors that can be deployed to observe an entire road network is costconstrained. Traditionally, static sensors such as loop detectors (Krause et al., 2008a; Wang and Papageorgiou, 2005) are placed at designated locations in a road network to collect data for predicting the traffic phenomenon. However, they provide sparse coverage (i.e., many road segments are not observed, thus leading to data sparsity), incur high installation and maintenance costs, and cannot reposition by themselves in response to changes in the traffic phenomenon. Low-cost GPS technology allows the collection of traffic data using passive mobile probes (Work et al., 2010) (e.g., taxis/cabs). Unlike static sensors, they can directly measure the travel times along road segments. But, they provide fairly sparse coverage due to low GPS sampling frequency (i.e., often imposed by taxi/cab companies) and no control over their routes, incur high initial implementation cost, pose privacy issues, and produce highly-varying speeds and travel times while traversing the same road segment due to inconsistent driving behaviors. A critical mass of probes is needed on each road segment to ease the severity of the last drawback (Srinivasan and Jovanis, 1996) but is often hard to achieve on non-highway segments due to sparse coverage. In contrast, we propose the use of active mobile probes (Turner et al., 1998) to overcome the limitations of static and passive mobile probes. In particular, they can be directed to explore any segments of a road network to gather traffic data at a desired GPS sampling rate while enforcing consistent driving behavior.
How then do the mobile probes/sensors actively explore a road network to gather and assimilate the most informative observations for predicting the traffic phenomenon? There are three key issues surrounding this problem, which will be discussed together with the related works:
Models for predicting spatiotemporal traffic phenomena. The spatiotemporal correlation structure of a traffic phenomenon can be exploited to predict the traffic conditions of any unobserved road segment at any time using the observations taken along the sensors’ paths. To achieve this, existing Bayesian filtering frameworks (Chen et al., 2011; Wang and Papageorgiou, 2005; Work et al., 2010) utilize various handcrafted parametric models predicting traffic flow along a highway stretch that only correlate adjacent segments of the highway. So, their predictive performance will be compromised when the current observations are sparse and/or the actual spatial correlation spans multiple segments. Their strong Markov assumption further exacerbates this problem. It is also not shown how these models can be generalized to work for arbitrary road network topologies and more complex correlation structure. Existing multivariate parametric traffic prediction models (Kamarianakis and Prastacos, 2003; Min and Wynter, 2011) do not quantify uncertainty estimates of the predictions and impose rigid spatial locality assumptions that do not adapt to the true underlying correlation structure.
In contrast, we assume the traffic phenomenon over an urban road network (i.e., comprising the full range of road types like highways, arterials, slip roads) to be realized from a rich class of Bayesian non-parametric models called the Gaussian process (GP) (Section 2) that can formally characterize its spatiotemporal correlation structure and be refined with growing number of observations. More importantly, GP can provide formal measures of predictive uncertainty (e.g., based on variance or entropy criterion) for directing the sensors to explore highly uncertain areas of the road network. Krause et al. (2008a) used GP to represent the traffic phenomenon over a network of only highways and defined the correlation of speeds between highway segments to depend only on the geodesic (i.e., shortest path) distance of these segments with respect to the network topology; their features are not considered. Neumann et al. (2009) maintained a mixture of two independent GPs for flow prediction such that the correlation structure of one GP utilized road segment features while that of the other GP depended on manually specified relations (instead of geodesic distance) between segments with respect to an undirected network topology. Different from the above works, we propose a relational GP whose correlation structure exploits the geodesic distance between segments based on the topology of a directed road network with vertices denoting road segments and edges indicating adjacent segments weighted by dissimilarity of their features, hence tightly integrating the features and relational information.
The observations are gathered distributedly by each sensor along its path in the road network and have to be assimilated in order to predict the traffic phenomenon. Since a large number of observations are expected to be collected, a centralized approach to GP prediction cannot be performed in real time due to its cubic time complexity.
To resolve this, we propose a decentralized data fusion approach to efficient and scalable approximate GP prediction (Section 3). Existing decentralized and distributed Bayesian filtering frameworks for addressing non-traffic related problems (Chung et al., 2004; Coates, 2004; OlfatiSaber, 2005; Rosencrantz et al., 2003; Sukkarieh et al., 2003) will face the same difficulties as their centralized counterparts described above if applied to predicting traffic phenomena, thus resulting in loss of predictive performance. Distributed regression algorithms (Guestrin et al., 2004; Paskin and Guestrin, 2004) for static sensor networks gain efficiency from spatial locality assumptions, which cannot be exploited by mobile sensors whose paths are not constrained by locality. Cortes (2009) proposed a distributed data fusion approach to approximate GP prediction based on an iterative Jacobi overrelaxation algorithm, which incurs some critical limitations: (a) the past observations taken along the sensors’ paths are assumed to be uncorrelated, which greatly undermines its predictive performance when they are in fact correlated and/or the current observations are sparse; (b) when the number of sensors grows large, it converges very slowly; (c) it assumes that the range of positive correlation has to be bounded by some factor of the communication range. Our proposed decentralized algorithm does not suffer from these limitations and can be computed exactly with efficient time bounds.
The sensors have to coordinate to actively gather the most informative observations for minimizing the uncertainty of modeling and predicting the traffic phenomenon. Existing centralized (Low et al., 2008, 2009a, 2011) and decentralized (Low et al., 2012; Stranders et al., 2009) active sensing algorithms scale poorly with a large number of observations and sensors. We propose a partially decentralized active sensing algorithm that overcomes these issues of scalability (Section 4).
This paper presents a novel Decentralized Data Fusion and Active Sensing (D2FAS) algorithm (Sections 3 and 4) for sampling spatiotemporally varying environmental phenomena with mobile sensors. Note that the decentralized data fusion component of D2FAS can also be used for static and passive mobile sensors. The practical applicability of D2FAS is not restricted to traffic monitoring; it can be used in other environmental sensing applications such as mineral prospecting (Low et al., 2007), monitoring of ocean and freshwater phenomena (Dolan et al., 2009; Podnar et al., 2010; Low et al., 2009b, 2011, 2012) (e.g., plankton bloom, anoxic zones), forest ecosystems, pollution (e.g., oil spill), or contamination (e.g., radiation leak). The specific contributions of this paper include:
Analyzing the time and communication overheads of D2FAS (Section 5): We prove that D2FAS can scale better than existing state-of-the-art centralized algorithms with a large number of observations and sensors;
Theoretically guaranteeing the predictive performance of the decentralized data fusion component of D2FAS to be equivalent to that of a sophisticated centralized sparse approximation for the GP model (Section 3): The computation of such a sparse approximate GP model can thus be parallelized and distributed among the mobile sensors (in a Google-like MapReduce paradigm), thereby achieving efficient and scalable prediction;
Theoretically guaranteeing the performance of the partially decentralized active sensing component of D2FAS, from which various practical environmental conditions can be established to improve its performance;
Developing a relational GP model whose correlation structure can exploit both the road segment features and road network topology information (Section 2.1);
Empirically evaluating the predictive performance, time efficiency, and scalability of the D2FAS algorithm on a real-world traffic phenomenon (i.e., speeds of road segments) dataset over an urban road network (Section 6): D2FAS is more time-efficient and scales significantly better with increasing number of observations and sensors while achieving predictive performance close to that of existing state-of-the-art centralized algorithms.